                         ########################
                         How to work with midiIn?
                         ########################

   On the bottom of the midiIn window there are 60 small squares. They
represent 60 independent banks. Each bank may contain one sample and has
it's own parameters. To edit the specific bank's parameters You have to
choose the bank either by clicking on it's small gadget, or with Amiga
keyboard, using the < > cursor keys. The "up" and "down" cursor keys
jump 10 banks up - down.
   The current bank is hilighted. All non-empty banks change their color,
too.
   You can Copy, Paste and Delete (clear all data) banks using the
corresponding entrys from the Edit menu or keyboard shortcuts
(ramiga + c,v,x).

The bank parameters are:

 - Midi chan - the MIDI channel assigned to this bank.

 - Bank priority - samples with higher priority mute samples with lower
   priority. If there are no free channels (see <sample playback>)
   and the NoteOn message comes, then the sample with lowest
   priority is stopped. However, if the new sample has the lowest
   priority, it is not played.

 - duration

   ON->OFF means that the sample is played as long as You keep the key on
   Your MIDI keyboard pressed. When the NoteOff message comes the
   sample stops according to release time from the <envelope window>.
   ON->ON means that to stop the sample You have to press the same key
   again. It's good especially for long, looped samples - You don't have
   to keep the key pressed.
   DRUM means that the sample is played from beginning to the end no matter
   how long You keep the key pressed; note that it's impossible to loop the
   DRUM sample

 - Mono - if checked, this particular bank is monophonic - You cannot play
   more than one sample at once; the new note mutes the previous one; the
   muted sample is not cut in a moment - it's faded according to it's
   envelope

 - Loop - if the gadget is checked, the sample is looped.

 - Mute group - allows to link banks in groups wich mute themselves. For
   example You may have an open and closed hihats. You want the closed hihat
   to mute the open one. You have to assign both of them to the same mute
   group. If bank has mute group = 0 it is not muted by anything. Again,
   samples are muted according to their envelope.

 - Base - the note being a base note of the sample. You choose it by
   pressing the SET gadget nearby and pressing the required key on MIDI
   keyboard or pointing it with mouse. The current base note will flash
   during editing. 
   When editing the base note be careful not to feed Amiga with random MIDI
   notes for example from sequencer, because it all affects the base note!
   If You play the sample above its base note it will sound higher, below
   the base note it will sound lower. It's easy and natural.

 - Fine tune - here You can tune Your samples. This parameter is
   scaled in cents (1 cent = 1/100 of halftone). So -100 means
   halftone lower and 100 means halftone higher. You can control
   Fine tune from keyboard "+"increases, "-" decreases and "*" resets the
   Fine tune.
   Notice, that Fine tune works in realtime, as You move the slider
   during sample playback.

 - Every bank is assigned to a RANGE on the keyboard. The range may
   be the whole keyboard, few octaves or even one key. The sample
   will be played only in this range. This allows to use many
   different samples on one MIDI channel.
   To edit range You have to check the Edit range gadget below the
   keyboard. The range assigned to active bank will turn blue (or whatever
   colour You have assigned in Your WB).

   You can edit the range dragging its ends with mouse, or You can
   use the MIDI keyboard - just press two limiting keys at once.
   If there are any banks on the same MIDI channel, their range is shown
   as a blue stripe in the upper part of the keyboard.
   The small gadgets representing these banks turns blue also.

   If You move the base note of the bank when Edit mode is active,
   the Range will move paralelly with the base note. It is a fast
   and easy way to transpose sample.

   When You finish editing the range, press the Edit range gadget again to
   leave the edit mode.

   When editing the range be careful not to feed Amiga with random MIDI
   notes for example from sequencer, because it all affects the range!


The Instrument List

   It is a list on the right part of midiIn window.  To assign a
sample to a bank You have to load it to the list first.  Every
sample from the list can be assigned to any number of free banks.
   To load a sample to the list click on the Add gadget below the list. A
standard file-requester will appear. Now select the samples You want to
load (multi-select option is available with shift key). You can also
select the project file - this will add all samples from chosen project
to the List.
   You can also add samples to List by dragging their icons onto the
Instrument List (the same goes to dragging project icons onto the
List).

   midiIn recognises the 8SVX (also 16 bit), AIFF and WAV samples. Trying
to load different sample formats will fail.

* NOTE: The samples are NOT loaded to memory now. They are loaded when You
assign them to specific banks. Of course if You assign one sample to more
than one bank, the sample is loaded to memory only once.

   To remove the sample from the list click on the Delete gadget below the
Instrument list and then double-click on the samples You want to remove.
To leave the Delete mode click on the Delete gadget again.

   To assign a sample to an empty bank just select the bank and click on
the sample's name on the list. The sample will be loaded to memory now. If
there's not enough free memory a requester will apprear.

* NOTE: Samples are stored in Fast memory. This allows You to have them as
many as Your Amiga permits.

   To remove the sample from the bank click on the Free gadget near the
Instrument (sample) name field.
   If You duble-click on sample in the Instrument List it will be loaded
to active bank even if it is not empty. It is the same as if You'd press
the Free gadget and then choose the sample, but faster. Good for
fast scan through the List.

   To clear the Instrument List press the Clear gadget. midiIn will ask
then if You want to clear all samples, the unused samples (the ones
that are not used in any bank), or You changed Your mind.


   There are four important gadgets in the upper right corner of the
midiIn window:

 - Follow - if checked, midiIn will automatically activate played
   bank; it is a good feature during editing banks - You don't
   usually remember the number of bank, or sample name, You rather
   associate the sound with key, or range that is assigned to it;
   now after pressing Your key and hearing Your sample You can edit
   its parameters immidately, without scrolling through non-empty
   banks and wondering which sample that was.
   During playback from sequencer, when many samples are played, it
   is good to turn Follow mode off to avoid useless jumping from bank to
   bank and leave some processor power for Scope ;)

 - the Edit gadget enters/leaves the Edit mode, where You assign the
   keyboard range to the bank. It is described above.

 - the Audio gadget allocates and frees the audio channels - You can
   use it when You want to run another program using audio channels
   and You don't want to quit midiIn; if audio channels are
   allocated midiIn always asks You for confirmation before quitting
   - this prevents You from unwanted quitting the program during
   performing (on stage for example)

 - the Midi control gadget turns on/off the external MIDI
   keyboard/sequencer control of midiIn
   When the Midi control gadget is NOT checked You can play samples
   with mouse clicking on the midiIn keyboard. The range values are
   not important. You can play the active bank's sample on the whole
   keyboard. Pressing the Enter key plays the sample with the base
   frequency.

   These gadgets can be also controlled by Audio enable and Midi control
entrys from the Settings menu and with keyboard shortcuts (keys 'f', 'a'
and 'm' + right Amiga key). 

   If these two gadgets are active, You can perform. midiIn waits for MIDI
NoteOn and NoteOff messages and plays samples as You assigned them.

